README.md, before:

# Fork-Version

[![NPM Version](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/fork-version)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/fork-version)
[![Version Package](https://github.com/eglavin/fork-version/actions/workflows/version.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/eglavin/fork-version/actions/workflows/version.yml)
[![Publish Package](https://github.com/eglavin/fork-version/actions/workflows/release.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/eglavin/fork-version/actions/workflows/release.yml)

<p align="center">
  <img src="assets/fork-version-logo.svg" alt="Fork Version Icon" width="200px">
</p>

<p align="center">
Fork-Version automates version control tasks such as determining, updating, and committing versions, files, and changelogs, simplifying the versioning process when adhering to the <a href="https://www.conventionalcommits.org">conventional commit</a> standard.
</p>

<details>
<summary>This project is essentially a complete re-write of standard-version following on from its deprecation in May 2022.</summary>
Although there are many alternatives such as <a href=https://github.com/googleapis/release-please>release-please</a>. This project aims to continue focusing on just the versioning and changelog generation aspect of the process for use in other Git hosts outside of Github.
</details>

## What Does Fork-Version Do?

By following the [conventional commit](https://www.conventionalcommits.org) standard Fork-Version can automate the following tasks for you:

1. Determine the current and next version
1. Update the version in the selected files
1. Update your changelog
1. Commit the changed files
1. Create a tag for the new version

## Using Fork-Version

Primarily designed to be used with `npx`, Fork-Version can also be installed globally or directly to the node package you're working on. The only software prerequisites you need are [git](https://git-scm.com) and [node](https://nodejs.org).

Fork-Version can be configured either through a config file or by passing options to the tool when ran, see the [Configuration File](#configuration-file) and [Command Line Options](#command-line-options) sections below for details on the supported options.

> [!NOTE]
> Command line options override defined config files.

### Using `npx` (Recommended)

To use Fork-Version with `npx` you can use the following command, by using `npx` you can also use Fork-Version without installation and on other projects including non node projects.

```sh
npx fork-version
```

> [!NOTE]
> If you want to use a specific version you can add a version tag at the end of the command like this `npx fork-version@1.4.67`
>
> The version tag needs to match against the [published version on npm](https://www.npmjs.com/package/fork-version?activeTab=versions).

### Install Locally

To install the package locally to your project you can use one of the following commands:

| Package Manager | Install Command                       |
| --------------- | ------------------------------------- |
| npm             | `npm install fork-version --save-dev` |
| yarn            | `yarn add fork-version --dev`         |
| pnpm            | `pnpm add fork-version --save-dev`    |

You can then add the following entry to your package.json scripts section and use it like any other script you already use in your project.

```json
{
  "scripts": {
    "release": "fork-version"
  }
}
```

For example if you use npm you can now use `npm run release` to run Fork-Version.

### Command Line Options

<!-- START COMMAND LINE OPTIONS -->

```txt
Usage:
  $ fork-version [options]

Commands:
  --help                Show this help message.
  --inspect-version     If set, fork-version will print the current version and exit.

Options:
  --file, -F            List of the files to be updated. [Default: ["bower.json", "manifest.json", "npm-shrinkwrap.json", "package-lock.json", "package.json"]]
  --glob, -G            Glob pattern to match files to be updated.
  --path, -P            The path fork-version will run from. [Default: process.cwd()]
  --changelog           Name of the changelog file. [Default: "CHANGELOG.md"]
  --header              The header text for the changelog.
  --tag-prefix          Specify a prefix for the created tag. [Default: "v"]
  --pre-release-tag     Make a pre-release with optional label if given value is a string.
  --current-version     If set, fork-version will use this version instead of trying to determine one.
  --next-version        If set, fork-version will attempt to update to this version, instead of incrementing using "conventional-commit".

Flags:
  --commit-all          Commit all staged changes, not just files updated by fork-version.
  --debug               Output debug information.
  --dry-run             No output will be written to disk or committed.
  --silent              Run without logging to the terminal.
  --git-tag-fallback    If unable to find a version in the given files, fallback and attempt to use the latest git tag. [Default: true]
  --sign                If true, git will sign the commit with the systems GPG key.
  --verify              If true, git will run user defined git hooks before committing.
```

<!-- END COMMAND LINE OPTIONS -->

### Configuration File

You can configure Fork-Version using one of the following files:

- [A javascript file](#javascript-config):
  - fork.config.ts
  - fork.config.js
  - fork.config.cjs
  - fork.config.mjs
- [A json file](#json-config):
  - fork.config.json
  - package.json >> Key Name: "fork-version"

#### Javascript Config

If you're using a javascript project you can define your config by using a default export.

The `defineConfig` function in the following snippet is optional though using it gives you intellisense information:

```js
import { defineConfig } from 'fork-version';

export default defineConfig({
  header: `# My Changelog`,
  files: ["package.json", "package-lock.json"],
});
```

Alternatively you can use a typescript type annotation:

```ts
import type { ForkConfig } from 'fork-version';

const myConfig: ForkConfig = {
  header: `# My Changelog`,
  files: ["package.json", "package-lock.json"],
};

export default myConfig;
```

Or jsdocs:

```js
/** @type {import("fork-version").ForkConfig} */
export default {
  header: `# My Changelog`,
  files: ["package.json", "package-lock.json"],
};
```

#### Json Config

You can also configure fork-version using a json file, in the schema folder in this repo we've generated a [json schema](./schema/latest.json) file which can be used to give you intellisense information similar to the javascript options above:

```json
{
  "$schema": "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/eglavin/fork-version/main/schema/latest.json",
  "header": "# My Changelog",
  "files": [
    "package.json",
    "package-lock.json"
  ],
}
```

Alternatively you can define your config using a key in your `package.json` file called `fork-version`:

```json
{
  "name": "my-js-project",
  "version": "1.2.3",
  "scripts": {
    "release": "fork-version"
  },
  "fork-version": {
    "header": "# My Changelog",
    "files": [
      "package.json",
      "package-lock.json"
    ],
  }
}
```

Commit message:

docs: clean up json config intro

README.md, after:

# Fork-Version

[![NPM Version](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/fork-version)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/fork-version)
[![Version Package](https://github.com/eglavin/fork-version/actions/workflows/version.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/eglavin/fork-version/actions/workflows/version.yml)
[![Publish Package](https://github.com/eglavin/fork-version/actions/workflows/release.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/eglavin/fork-version/actions/workflows/release.yml)

<p align="center">
  <img src="assets/fork-version-logo.svg" alt="Fork Version Icon" width="200px">
</p>

<p align="center">
Fork-Version automates version control tasks such as determining, updating, and committing versions, files, and changelogs, simplifying the versioning process when adhering to the <a href="https://www.conventionalcommits.org">conventional commit</a> standard.
</p>

<details>
<summary>This project is essentially a complete re-write of standard-version following on from its deprecation in May 2022.</summary>
Although there are many alternatives such as <a href=https://github.com/googleapis/release-please>release-please</a>. This project aims to continue focusing on just the versioning and changelog generation aspect of the process for use in other Git hosts outside of Github.
</details>

## What Does Fork-Version Do?

By following the [conventional commit](https://www.conventionalcommits.org) standard Fork-Version can automate the following tasks for you:

1. Determine the current and next version
1. Update the version in the selected files
1. Update your changelog
1. Commit the changed files
1. Create a tag for the new version

## Using Fork-Version

Primarily designed to be used with `npx`, Fork-Version can also be installed globally or directly to the node package you're working on. The only software prerequisites you need are [git](https://git-scm.com) and [node](https://nodejs.org).

Fork-Version can be configured either through a config file or by passing options to the tool when ran, see the [Configuration File](#configuration-file) and [Command Line Options](#command-line-options) sections below for details on the supported options.

> [!NOTE]
> Command line options override defined config files.

### Using `npx` (Recommended)

To use Fork-Version with `npx` you can use the following command, by using `npx` you can also use Fork-Version without installation and on other projects including non node projects.

```sh
npx fork-version
```

> [!NOTE]
> If you want to use a specific version you can add a version tag at the end of the command like this `npx fork-version@1.4.67`
>
> The version tag needs to match against the [published version on npm](https://www.npmjs.com/package/fork-version?activeTab=versions).

### Install Locally

To install the package locally to your project you can use one of the following commands:

| Package Manager | Install Command                       |
| --------------- | ------------------------------------- |
| npm             | `npm install fork-version --save-dev` |
| yarn            | `yarn add fork-version --dev`         |
| pnpm            | `pnpm add fork-version --save-dev`    |

You can then add the following entry to your package.json scripts section and use it like any other script you already use in your project.

```json
{
  "scripts": {
    "release": "fork-version"
  }
}
```

For example if you use npm you can now use `npm run release` to run Fork-Version.

### Command Line Options

<!-- START COMMAND LINE OPTIONS -->

```txt
Usage:
  $ fork-version [options]

Commands:
  --help                Show this help message.
  --inspect-version     If set, fork-version will print the current version and exit.

Options:
  --file, -F            List of the files to be updated. [Default: ["bower.json", "manifest.json", "npm-shrinkwrap.json", "package-lock.json", "package.json"]]
  --glob, -G            Glob pattern to match files to be updated.
  --path, -P            The path fork-version will run from. [Default: process.cwd()]
  --changelog           Name of the changelog file. [Default: "CHANGELOG.md"]
  --header              The header text for the changelog.
  --tag-prefix          Specify a prefix for the created tag. [Default: "v"]
  --pre-release-tag     Make a pre-release with optional label if given value is a string.
  --current-version     If set, fork-version will use this version instead of trying to determine one.
  --next-version        If set, fork-version will attempt to update to this version, instead of incrementing using "conventional-commit".

Flags:
  --commit-all          Commit all staged changes, not just files updated by fork-version.
  --debug               Output debug information.
  --dry-run             No output will be written to disk or committed.
  --silent              Run without logging to the terminal.
  --git-tag-fallback    If unable to find a version in the given files, fallback and attempt to use the latest git tag. [Default: true]
  --sign                If true, git will sign the commit with the systems GPG key.
  --verify              If true, git will run user defined git hooks before committing.
```

<!-- END COMMAND LINE OPTIONS -->

### Configuration File

You can configure Fork-Version using one of the following files:

- [A javascript file](#javascript-config):
  - fork.config.ts
  - fork.config.js
  - fork.config.cjs
  - fork.config.mjs
- [A json file](#json-config):
  - fork.config.json
  - package.json >> Key Name: "fork-version"

#### Javascript Config

If you're using a javascript project you can define your config by using a default export.

The `defineConfig` function in the following snippet is optional though using it gives you intellisense information:

```js
import { defineConfig } from 'fork-version';

export default defineConfig({
  header: `# My Changelog`,
  files: ["package.json", "package-lock.json"],
});
```

Alternatively you can use a typescript type annotation:

```ts
import type { ForkConfig } from 'fork-version';

const myConfig: ForkConfig = {
  header: `# My Changelog`,
  files: ["package.json", "package-lock.json"],
};

export default myConfig;
```

Or jsdocs:

```js
/** @type {import("fork-version").ForkConfig} */
export default {
  header: `# My Changelog`,
  files: ["package.json", "package-lock.json"],
};
```

#### Json Config

You can also configure Fork-Version using a json file called `fork.config.json` this is a good option if you're using Fork-Version on a non javascript project.

In the schema folder in this repo we've generated a [json schema](./schema/latest.json) file which can be used to give you intellisense information similar to the javascript options above:

```json
{
  "$schema": "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/eglavin/fork-version/main/schema/latest.json",
  "header": "# My Changelog",
  "files": [
    "package.json",
    "package-lock.json"
  ],
}
```

Alternatively you can define your config using a key in your `package.json` file called `fork-version`:

```json
{
  "name": "my-js-project",
  "version": "1.2.3",
  "scripts": {
    "release": "fork-version"
  },
  "fork-version": {
    "header": "# My Changelog",
    "files": [
      "package.json",
      "package-lock.json"
    ],
  }
}
```
